A potential signature of eight long non-coding RNAs predicts survival in patients with non-small cell lung cancer.
BACKGROUND: Accumulated evidence suggests that dysregulated expression of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) may play a critical role in tumorigenesis and prognosis of cancer, indicating the potential utility of lncRNAs as cancer prognostic or diagnostic markers. However, the power of lncRNA signatures in predicting the survival of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) has not yet been investigated.METHODS: We performed an array-based transcriptional analysis of lncRNAs in large patient cohorts with NSCLC by repurposing microarray probes from the gene expression omnibus database. A risk score model was constructed based on the expression data of these eight lncRNAs in the training dataset of NSCLC patients and was subsequently validated in other two independent NSCLC datasets. The biological implications of prognostic lncRNAs were also analyzed using the functional enrichment analysis.RESULTS: An expression pattern of eight lncRNAs was found to be significantly associated with overall survival (OS) of NSCLC patients in the training dataset. With the eight-lncRNA signature, patients of the training dataset could be classified into high- and low-risk groups with significantly different OS (median survival 1.67 vs. 6.06 years, log-rank test p = 4.33E-09). The prognostic power of eight-lncRNA signature was further validated in other two non-overlapping independent NSCLC cohorts, demonstrating good reproducibility and robustness of this eight-lncRNA signature in predicting OS of NSCLC patients. Multivariate regression and stratified analysis suggested that the prognostic power of the eight-lncRNA signature was independent of clinical and pathological factors. Functional enrichment analyses revealed potential functional roles of the eight prognostic lncRNAs in tumorigenesis.CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that the eight-lncRNA signature may be an effective independent prognostic molecular biomarker in the prediction of NSCLC patient survival.